I think that there is something in us that is that we can recognize which is a drive towards power. It's what the Greeks call hubris.
It's the desire to be like the gods to be able to say we can do anything we can make anything.
And this was always, of course, in Greek tragedy, this is the theme of Greek tragedy, is that the hero becomes hubristic, and as a result, there is a catastrophe, literally a downfall.
And this is how civilizations work, they overreach themselves, they do, they get, they get to believe they can do anything and everything.
And as a result, they become unwieldy, they become less creative, they become more stultified by bureaucracy, and eventually they lose morale.
I think that's a very important point, because one of the effects of over bureaucracy, or too great bureaucracy, is that those who are subject to its control lose their morale.
And this is the reason it's not very hard to reason why is it so hard to recruit doctors and nurses and police and military people, because they no longer feel they've got any autonomy or that respectful them as experts.
Instead, they have to follow procedures set down by a sporadic bureaucracy.
And this, of course, is the death of everything except mediocrity and eventually collapse of a civilization.
Welcome Ian. Ian McGillchrist, scientist, scholar, practicing, or formerly practicing clinical psychiatrist.
And if I dare say also philosopher, welcome Ian to this podcast, we're very happy to have you at the conciliators podcast.
Ian, you're very well known for having to written two books that have had a huge impact on a lot of people.
The first is the master and his emissary, which I have right here, or that when I read, I must say, hit me a bit like a lightning bolt, because what it did, as I think it does to many people is to reflect back to us.
There are ways that we think that had not been quite crystallized in our minds.
And I think by doing that, you really helped us see who we are. Number one, and in that sense that book is a is a strong and powerful reflection of ourselves.
And the second book is the matter with things, the two volume sets also here will show a fantastic trip from physiology up to the sacred and everything in between.
In both books, your paradigm of looking at the two hemispheres the left and the right hemisphere of our brains, and, and therefore the outlooks that we have from each of them out onto the world penetrates both books.
And especially in the matter with things, it's tremendous how you show through that, how our minds connect culture to our values to the very perception of the world.
And then back again, the how those affect our mind in a kind of circle.
So, these are, these are great books and we're very happy to have you here for this. What, what brings us together in a way is that we're both fans, I think of Patrick O'Fields who wrote the moderate grip.
A short cornflakes really not a book a pithy book.
It has all the virtues that my work doesn't have.
Well, they're certainly different, but they both, they both have a tremendous and powerful impact both.
And on Patrick's, the reason we want to speak to today is is that Patrick's book really makes a point about that civilizations decline and what they do so they do so quickly, and they very much do so due to overshoot.
They very much like to hear from you about your perception of where we are.
Where is our society at.
Why is it like that due to your perception of things.
But first, before we even get into that, maybe just to give everybody a baseline. Could you just give us a bit of a description of the left and right hemisphere how they work.
And that people know what the base of paradigm that you have put forward is.
And also, also importantly, why is it that we have these two modes of, of working evolution that for a reason.
Yes, yes.
I like the way you described the matter with things as starting in physiology and ending with the sacred.
And as I think that I don't see the realm of matter and consciousness as rigidly separate.
As a result, I see them as facets of one another. And what I might need to battle away from slightly is the idea that what I'm doing is exactly explaining things.
I think there's a sense in which I explain things, but it's by showing likenesses, rather than saying this causes that.
So I'm not talking about the brain as a cause. I'm talking about the brain as something that we need to take into account.
It can talk to us about our own thought processes. And that's its importance for me.
So here we have two distinct hemispheres and quite how distinct they are can be pointed up by the fact that only 2% of neurons actually cross from one hemisphere to the other through a structure at the base of the brain called the corpus callosum.
It's also worth pointing out that the corpus callosum is a mammalian invention and that up until mammals, there wasn't even that rather exiguous connection between the two hemispheres.
There were very, very tiny connections called commissures, but that was it.
So this structure of the being two and of there being asymmetrical goes back as far as we can trace it in terms of all creatures where we can look at a neuronal system of any kind, never mind a brain.
There seems to be a distinction and an asymmetry.
Why is that I hold and nobody has come up as far as I'm aware with a better explanation and nobody has told me I'm wrong.
My explanation is that the two hemispheres pay two kinds of attention to the world that may not sound riveting, but attention is in fact incredibly important.
When I first discovered this distinction, the whole import of it didn't entirely hit me and until shortly afterwards, because I had been trained in a sort of paradigm whereby attention was just another so called cognitive function.
That is to see the brain as a machine that somehow mediates whatever it is that we are.
But in fact, attention is something a machine cannot pay attention is the way in which consciousness is disposed towards the world is the manner in which and the direction in which consciousness is disposed towards whatever the rest of the world is outside of ourselves.
The distinction here is that one of the hemispheres, the one that enables us to feed principally, but also to get stuff of all kinds to use to build shelter to, to make tools and so forth, requires a very sharply focused, detailed, narrow beam attention to something that's already prioritized.
We know that it's what we want, we focus it, we fix it, and we get it.
The trouble with that is that being very narrowly targeted and locked on to one tiny thing in the entire expanse of potential experience.
This excludes knowledge of other things that may at the same time be extremely important. I mean above all the presence of a predator, but also the presence of one's kin ones mate ones offspring.
The brain needs to be on the lookout for to protect and to provide for. So the brain needs to be able to give us two kinds of attention at the same time one broad, open, importantly uncommitted as to what it may find vigilant and sustained and the other piecemeal and locked on to something that is already known and familiar and desired.
Now the thing that's important here is that that leads to two different experiential worlds.
The kind of locked narrow targeted very precise attention to something that you're grabbing gives rise to a world that appears to be composed of fragments that are detached from one another.
For the moment static, decontextualized representatives of a category it's a seed it's a bird it's a worm it's a whatever a stick.
In this sense, they are mental constructs.
Whereas the right hemisphere sees the full complexity of the physical reality. So it sees something that is never entirely isolated from everything else that is never completely fixed or static that is not certainly known.
It can be recognized but it always has opened the possibility that it might be something else very important.
It sees things that the left hemisphere ignores it sees the stuff that is necessarily implicit. It sees things that are individual unique and personal, and it sees everything as embodied in a context, not just the context of things surrounding it but also the context of an embodied
being that is approaching it. And this is a world to which we are connected whereas the other one is a world from which we are sort of clinically detached so that we can operate a strike in it.
Now you can see that these seem philosophically highly distinct and I believe they are.
The interesting point I think about this way of thinking is that it is absolutely incontrovertible and not controversial amongst neurologists that there is this attentional difference.
And it's equally not controversial amongst philosophers that attention changes what it is that comes to attention. And all I was really doing was putting these two things together.
So that is, that is it in a nutshell. Why this is important is that we take in different aspects of the world using both our hemispheres, and we alternate between the visions of these hemispheres very rapidly.
And it's not a clear clean cut one that only one hemisphere is attending both hemispheres are attending in their way, they're contributing to an overall picture, but the emphasis changes, depending on what we're up to if we're hungry and in aggressive mode and the left
hemispheres attention dominates. If, if we're not, and we are actually interested in taking in and trying to understand the complexity of the world that we live in then the other one comes before that at the right hemisphere.
So that's it in a nutshell.
I'm a gradian. So, given that, if we look at, if we look at today's world of limited maintenance and characteristics, and then see how you would see those in terms of the hemispheres.
So for example, if I look out on our world in 2024.
I see, I see a lot of polarization, a lot of black and white thinking, fragmentation, even if it's not necessarily physical violence is a lot of sort of virtual violence is a lot of sort of anger, emotional anger and people getting upset over, sometimes over small things
sometimes over larger things but, and then heated and and extreme evaluation of whoever does not hold your position that's one state of affairs.
So that is something radically different, which is, let me just describe it as a kind of bureaucratic world, a world where regulations rule, tiny little regulations but if you have you know a million tiny regulations you're basically can
sunk, because you're spending your whole life dealing with those regulations and almost every aspect of your life.
And of course, the regulations require codification, they require abstracting things, etc, etc.
Those are two aspects of our life that I see, maybe not the more pleasant aspects.
There are others we can look into as well. But for those two, how do those relate then to your to your to have hemispheres.
I think we end up with these qualities.
Well, of course, how we end up with anything is is I don't want people to think that I'm simplistically saying everything is controlled by our brain.
I'd rather say that forces which can be economic and political as well as environmental and emotional and so on conspire to make us adopt a stance towards the world, which is that of the, the left hemisphere I say at the moment.
There are several things to say just at the outset. The first is that the left hemisphere tends to be exclusive, whereas the right hemisphere tends to be inclusive.
The image in the title, the master and his emissary is based on the story of a master who appoints as it were his righteous and best to go about a functionary to go and do a lot of business on his behalf.
He not only knows that he can't afford to deal with all this stuff but that he must actually not be involved in it if he's going to keep an oversight of the picture.
This functionary although he's, he's bright is not very bright and doesn't really understand very much. And because he doesn't understand very much he thinks he understands everything.
This is what's known in psychology as the Dunning Kruger effect the less you know the more you think you know and vice versa. So this figure is adamant and inflexible and an administrator which is a relevant point to what you were mentioning just before this.
So the, what I see happening is that this functionary with its very narrow vision of things that must be regulated.
After all remember that the resonance depth of the left hemisphere is to get power to control things to grab to get to manipulate.
I sometimes say the left hemisphere enables us to apprehend the world in the sense of literally grasping onto it at prehendery and the right hemisphere to understand it to comprehend it in other words to take it all together.
So in this vision of the left hemisphere, it things are black and white. Remember that if you're trying to grab something very quickly, because it's your food, you can't afford to have second thoughts about what it is you have to go for it.
Otherwise, you'll miss the opportunity.
The right hemisphere is very quick and dirty. And it thinks it's impatient with ambivalence or ambiguity. It wants things to be clarified in a straightforward way, either it's this or it's that the right hemisphere is what Ramachandran.
Yes Ramachandran well known neuroscientist calls the devil's advocate in that it's always saying yes but it might be something else.
It's even more considered the right hemisphere says well it's not as simple as that, but the left hemisphere tends to be cut and dried black and white.
Also, it is wrong. I mean all the things that we used to say almost all the things we used to say about hemisphere difference turn out to be wrong.
What I heard I have to get over with people is that they've heard that all that stuff about hemispheres was shown to be completely wrong ages ago. And what that really means is that the first take on it, which, you know, science works by having a rough take on
it having to be knocked into shape and things have to be let go of and replaced. But the idea that the left hemisphere was somehow dependable and rational and the right hemisphere was kind of airy fairy needed the left hemisphere to tether it to reality is in fact the inverse of the truth.
The left hemisphere on its own, and this is not just me saying this but I can cite a couple of other neurologists who come to the same independent expression that the left hemisphere on its own is delusional.
And that's important because I don't use that word in a kind of conversational way. I mean it literally is delusional, in the sense that delusional syndromes, very many interesting ones in neuropsychiatry are almost always because the right hemisphere is not functioning properly and we're
reliant on the left. When we're reliant on the left we go astray. It is also by no means unemotional. So one of the most strongly in fact the most strongly lateralized emotion is anger, and it lateralizes to the left hemisphere.
So the fact that people become adamant angry is very much what you'd expect. The left hemisphere is also about me. The right hemisphere is more social.
The right hemisphere is the one in which there is. It is what makes us what Aristotle called the so on politic on which doesn't mean the political animal. It means the social animal because policy is the is the society, the city.
So the right hemisphere is the root of empathy of the ability to feel your way into what other people understand to see the gradations of meaning to make connections, whereas the left hemisphere is about me me me.
I need that I'm grabbing that and it's highly competitive.
The story I just want to add this in here, which we've been told that we are basically competitive beings and that evolution is all about competition. This is half of a story and actually the lesser half.
More important, it's quite true that there is competition and competition is helpful. And it's part of the reasons that we do evolve.
But the beings that have been successful in the story of evolution have learned to cooperate. And there is what I call collaboration where you marry cooperation with competition.
And these two hemispheres have different attitudes to the other. And the left tends to be in that sense, a narcissist. It's an egotist. And so you get when people are in this mindset.
First of all, they're adamant that they're right. They think that reality is clear cut. They think that there is no other point of view but theirs. They are angry when challenged.
They believe that they have the moral high ground and they are right and they can see it and all you stupid people can't. So, if that's the way the world looks, then I think that is very much in keeping with the left hemisphere view.
Another thing you mentioned is about administration and I think it's incredibly important. I think that what is happening and has happened in previous civilizations is that as they become more complex, many things happen and Patrick offers in his books.
And perhaps we should point out that his publishing name is William Orphils. In a kind way, I'd like to say to him, Patrick, it wasn't the Patrick that gave you away. It was the unusual name Orphils. You should have changed that bit.
Not the old crutch, did they? But anyway, anyway, Patrick Orphils in his book points out, in modern greatness, I think he points through about half a dozen things, four of them, as it were, bio systemic and two of them being interior to do with mentality really.
But I believe administration is the expression of this simple algorithmic way of controlling things. It sees procedures as more important than the actualities of the situation involved.
In fact, the situation is itself already replaced by a schematic idea.
So one of the differences between the right hemisphere and the left hemisphere is the left hemisphere is the hemisphere of theory, the hemisphere of abstraction of a diagram of a map.
And there's nothing wrong with having theories, diagrams and maps. They're important and valuable. But the thing is that they radically simplified compared with the complexity of reality. That's the virtue.
They didn't get better by being more and more complex. But the trouble is that it's mistaken in the system for reality. So all the nuances, all the stuff to do with quality rather than quantity, all the things to do with the uniqueness of a case rather than the generality of it.
So what it is to do with the embodiment, the meaning of it emotionally, morally and so on is replaced by statistical norms that can be run as it were in the computer or by people who image this way of thinking in the way that they administrate.
I see that two of the great attacks on the living world now are AI and bureaucracy that the two of them are in fact a massive push by the left hemisphere to dominate the world.
You know, that sounds perhaps a little extreme, but when you come to look at it, it is remarkably consistent throughout the picture that I'm, I'm looking at all the world and the one that you're describing.
It's interesting, you've put the focus on AI and bureaucracy and Ophuls, Mr. Ophuls, uses, as I mentioned earlier, also puts a lot of emphasis on overshoot.
The reason that this collapse actually is because we do one thing well and they keep doing it too much until the whole system gets too complex and basically collapses of its own weight.
I think one could make the case that both in both technology, ie AI now, and bureaucracy over regulation.
We will, are we risking that in both. And is that is that also a characteristic of the left hemisphere this tendency to not stop doing what it's doing and just keep adding to what it's doing rather than this you need the right hemisphere to go back into larger context and balance is that right.
Very much so yes, the right hemisphere gets fixated it gets stuck it has a stickiness if you like compared with the right hemisphere which has a great degree of flexibility.
So you've got a relatively sclerotic rigid way of thinking and and living compared with a much more adaptive and flexible way of thinking and being.
You, you're absolutely right and one of the things that some dining dining in Kruger less well known for is a piece of research that resonates very much with me and I imagine with you.
I think that when people have a need a fix that certain thing is how this thing must work.
They are so reluctant to let go of it that even when they're presented with manifest evidence that it's not working in the way that they have projected in theory at well.
I believe that the problem is not that they may have either gone in the wrong direction or have gone in what was originally a very good direction that but that now has become excessive, but that they have not gone far enough.
There are redoubled efforts to recruit more management to insist on enforcing the rule and no moment again. Oh goodness perhaps we need to rethink that's something the left hemisphere doesn't say, whereas the right hemisphere even when it's on to something is willing to listen to
an alternative point of view.
So those, I think that's relevant. I think the other thing that's worth saying is.
The left hemisphere seems to have a war on life.
One way of thinking about this slightly more sophisticated is that the left hemisphere is rather like a self contained system.
What complexity of reality is out there if you like and then there's a room with computers and things like I'm talking of course metaphorically in which things are worked out but this is a relatively hermetic system and what it what it refers to is the products of its own thinking,
there's a right hemisphere is always saying but hang on, there's a world out there let's connect back to experience and experience should be able to correct us on this.
Now the difficulty is that the left hemisphere really only recognizes what it itself has made and in its desire to have control and it becomes quite paranoid when it doesn't have control.
Nature and the body and life are huge rebuffs to this idea of control, because you have to recognize that the body is mortal that we're going to die, you have to recognize that the body has certain, I think enormously important.
If you care to look at them from that point of view restrictions on what we can be but very often when you look at a restriction it's also a window on an opportunity.
So things come into being through being defined and defining means having borders and borders are what makes anything come into being if they're too rigid then of course it will become sclerotic but as long as they're flexible.
You see something through the opportunity is given to you by being molded. So the fact that we have nature imposes if you like if you want to look at it that way certain limits on the way we are also liberations.
I mean, I make this point very often that freedom is not just being allowed to do whatever you want.
Being allowed to do whatever you want leads to people being fractious unhappy distracted distraught despondent despairing. And if you do this with children, they quickly become completely delinquent and distressed.
So having containment having boundaries is actually the secret of true freedom. Freedom comes as the outcome of self discipline.
So if you don't have that discipline, you have not freedom but chaos. Freedom is something that is shaped. So I just wanted to say that. So I think that the attack on life is something that helps to explain the obsession with more and more bureaucracy and the the obsession with
other things. It's almost as though a secondary point to to amassing power is to defeating life.
And as as you were speaking, I was thinking of another horseman of the apocalypse.
Otherwise, I don't think we need to get into this too heavily but and that is actually there's a similar effect with ideology, since I work a lot in political arena, ideologies also a closed system, a re presentation of the world.
And once one adheres to it. That's it. You're going to expand the world through it.
And of course, we also get extremists and ideology because they think the most left brain wish that all I have to do is more and better of this ideology, and the world will be fixed.
And that reverse happens, which is that they become destructive forces actually but anyway that's an additional component but Ian I wanted to ask you about something else.
I think we're both fans of Matt's Desmond Matias Desmond, and his book. Yeah, we have totalitarianism.
And he makes the case that we're in a very vulnerable world where where people are very anxious because their emotional states are completely awry.
Therefore they're very vulnerable to manipulation and vulnerable to be taken over almost by mass systems such as a totalitarian system.
So, two questions related to that first, do you buy that that we're at risk of a kind of almost global totalitarianism number one, a techno totalitarianism I think is the term that's being used.
And secondly, the other question is, some people view this as a kind of cabal a conspiracy of people who are setting this up, whereas I'm more of the school that it's not necessarily kind of almost cartoonish cabal, as much as it's more related to the ideas you're
going forward, which is that there is a kind of mode of thought out there, that if fed, if fed sufficiently becomes overpowering and penetrates almost everything that we do.
I don't know what's named to give that is it a force is it a way of thought that has force, but I see it more as it's not disembodied it's part of our being.
And our marriage to that is what's actually going to create this totalitarianism, should it happen, but what are your thoughts about that, which is kind of the most frightening scenario if you wish of the world we're in.
At first point, do you think that that the, the growth of AI will lead to ever tighter control, approaching totalitarianism or becoming frankly totalitarian.
I think yes, I think it's very hard to see how we can actually avoid this unless, unless there's some sort of a breakdown which means that the growth of AI itself becomes limited I can't imagine by what that might be it might be by a societal collapse.
It might be running out of resources that can fuel the enormously energy, expensive growth of these colossal AI structures.
I do think that yes it's a very real threat and hard to see how to avoid it.
What I don't think, and here I would agree with you, I don't think that this is so much, I mean there may be individuals who are psychopathically interested in personal power control and amassing of wealth.
There may be such people, but I don't think that this is really the, the, either the full explanation or the main explanation. I think that it's something that is bigger than the people who think they're controlling this.
I think the big wigs in Silicon Valley who feel like they're bringing about something are themselves the puppets of something that they don't fully understand.
They are being controlled as much as anyone else. And it's interesting that bureaucracy is also like this.
I don't want to waste time but I can tell you a very short story about Oxford. I gave a lecture a couple of years ago over the internet and afterwards the University of Oxford promised to pay me and I was delighted it was a reasonably decent sum.
And in the old days somebody would have put a check in the post job done and I'd have received it three days later.
No, now I had to go online onto a platform and do various things and I found that it didn't operate in the way it should do. And never mind there was somebody who was going to hold my hand through this process.
This went on for three months. At the end of the three months the person left and said but don't worry there's someone else coming along who will guide you through the next step. And when I got to the next step I had to go on another platform.
And at the end of this I was just totally frustrated because I was offered a checklist of things. I had to tick something in the checklist and there were options for all sorts of things like catering, window cleaning and so on.
But there wasn't one for delivering a lecture or anything like it. Even teaching, which I had thought was one of the purposes of university.
So in the end I rang the university chest which as you know is the finance department of Oxford University. And amazingly enough and this won't happen in the future I got to speak to a real living human being.
And I said there's a bit of a nightmare this thing and she said, Oh, tell us about it. It makes our lives so much more difficult. It's so complicated.
I don't know what to say I said but I've got to tick some box. What do I do. And she said, Oh, take any box and we'll pay you so I tick window cleaning and assume the money turned up in my account.
Now my reason for telling that is that it's just a very vivid example of what I come across all the time that people in bureaucracies are driven mad by the bureaucracy itself.
And yet we think that the answer to this is to have a bit more to remedy the problem with the bureaucracy. And this becomes very expensive. One of the things that's now happened of course is that nobody can say we don't need a DEI department.
There are people at really very handsome salaries above those of the people that there as it were managing like the actual researchers, the professors, the consultant doctors and so on, are appointed and a lot of money goes into this.
And then of course the costs of running this thing become greater. And so the costs of fees go up and people can't afford the fees so universities have to recruit rich people from abroad who don't necessarily clear the normal barriers.
The whole thing begins to fragment and fall apart.
Again it has been have no longer enough money to do basic things because everything's become so complicated. There's so much admin around it if you could cut through that, you know, and it's just everywhere.
So, I see that as part of the problem and it's a bigger problem than the people who are running it. And so what is it. Well, I think that there is something in us that is that we can recognize which is a drive towards power.
And that's what the Greeks call hubris. It's the desire to be like the gods to be able to say, we can do anything, we can make anything. And this was always, of course, in Greek tragedy, this is the theme of Greek tragedy, is that the hero becomes
a mystic. And as a result, there is a catastrophe literally a downfall. And this is how civilizations work they overreach themselves they do, they get, they get to believe they can do anything and everything.
But as a result, they become unwieldy, they become less creative, they become more stultified by bureaucracy, and eventually they lose morale. I think that's a very important point, because one of the effects of over bureaucracy, or too great bureaucracy, is that those who are subject to its control
lose their morale. And this is the reason it's not very hard to reason why is it so hard to recruit doctors and nurses and police and militia people, because they no longer feel they've got any autonomy or that respectful them as experts.
Instead, they have to follow procedures set down by a sclerotic bureaucracy. And this of course is the death of everything except mediocrity and eventually collapse of a civilization.
Is there needs aren't met, and they become miserable, and the cycle spirals down and down. But you mentioned Greek tragedy and it's a useful I think segue, if I can take us with slightly different direction, and, and get your view.
In the master in his emissary, you have quite a few chapters about civilizations that for a long while got it right.
Ancient Greece, the Renaissance, and others.
Could we talk about that a bit and have a better understanding of what does a more balanced civilization, presumably the one we're in is not balanced.
What does that look like. You mentioned great tragedy. I remember reading in your book that that the fact that the Greeks invented this possibility of being able to see themselves on the stage through character in a story was a tremendous.
If you wish, balance brain exercise right and left working together. The same could possibly be said about Shakespearean theater in Elizabethan England.
Tragedy and comedy which I think are more right brain like emotes than anger say.
Our hallmarks of Shakespeare. Good story. Tremendous characters that we can all identify with the ambition of jealousy and the fellow, etc.
Again, again theater. What else can look for what else are the characteristics of a more balanced civilization hopefully one day we'll get back to more balance.
I should forget to mention the Renaissance and the Renaissance man or or human which is something which I think you described as someone who seeks endlessly broader contexts to learn with and to learn and be with.
So what can we learn from these civilizations what are their hallmarks in on the kind of more positive side of things rather than than dwelling on our own.
Of course it's quite another question how we couldn't bring them about I think that in a moderate greatness Patrick awful says written at the start I think he's creating Wendell Berry I think but saying that the cultures are like organisms they can't be engineered in a certain
direction they evolve in their own time to where they can so usually what happens is that things fall apart and there's a long period before they regenerate.
I'm sorry to be realistic but the right hemisphere is realistic, whereas the left hemisphere always wants to live in some fantasy in which by its perfect control of things that will bring us through.
Having said that.
What I think you're looking at there is ways of understanding ourselves which are not those of reduction.
Instead of going to smaller parts, fragmenting analyzing and breaking up, you're seeing where something is situated in a much bigger context.
As you know the Greeks had two ideas of truth, one was Muthos, which gives us the word myth, and the other was logos, which gives us the word logic.
Initially mythos or Muthos was thought to be the greater. It was the one that could actually help us understand the really big things.
Whereas logic was a kind of slightly petty fogging business that would go on in a court of law in order to decide whether somebody owed somebody money or not.
It was never going to get you to the deep realities. And in some sense, this is a very important insight that our big truths are not incompressible in simple everyday language.
It's too explicit. It's too much brings us back to the everyday that we already know. And the secret of understanding is to get beyond what we think we already know to be aware of what it is we don't know.
It's a very dangerous situation when you don't know what it is you don't know, and that is the left hemisphere's typical status.
So, when we think of the things that make life worth living, they are things like love, sex, religion, nature, poetry, art, music, ritual, myth, narrative.
None of these, none of these is well understood by the left hemisphere, because it's always trying to make everything simple and explicit.
Whereas the whole point of these other things is not to be collapsed immediately into a banal certainty, but to try and bring us into the presence, the living presence of something that is beyond that and help us to see it.
And what I think is important about drama is that it at its very best and in the Greek tragedies and in Shakespeare you see it as its very best.
What we are seeing is, as has been said, you know, Shakespeare holds a mirror up to nature that we see ourselves in a way that we can't see if we're locked into ourselves, but we can see ourselves in a rounded way,
in a mechanistic way, according to certain principles. And my brother, I might mention Nigel McGilchrist is principally an art historian, but he's written a fabulous book about Pythagoras and the Greek world.
And the point that he made was to me a great irony that the Greeks were a civilization that started without, as it were, a state religion.
This is not true of Egypt, it wasn't true of Rome, it wasn't true of, but Greece actually started without a body of sacred beliefs that it was going to follow.
And it instead, instead of developing either a religion or a specific philosophical structure, it went on to produce philosophers, of course, was drama.
And as it were, knowledge was played out in drama, and it was this that gave us an understanding of what humans are.
Now, the problem I feel is that we're so much in love with the idea of things that will make us powerful and make us money, that we have prioritized what are known as the STEM subjects over the humanities.
And to me, that is a huge problem. Not that there is something wrong with the STEM subjects, and I myself, particularly fond of they're not very good at mathematics, because I think it's extremely beautiful realm.
But these things are not an education. They are mainly the learning of procedures and techniques, math is its best isn't that the STEM subjects broadly technology and all these things are engineering.
They're learning procedures and techniques and so on, but they don't tell you about humanity, and they don't tell you about how to think and how to feed your way into an understanding of something.
And so they reduce us to this very, very much more limited left hemisphere world. And I should just throw in here.
And in the first part of the matter of things as you know, it is devoted to neuropsychiatry and neuropsychology.
So is, I'm looking at the portals whereby we would get any kind of information really that can help us build knowledge of the world.
And I suggest that these are attention, perception, judgment formed on the basis of what we attend to and what we perceive emotional and social intelligence, how to interpret this cognitive intelligence IQ, and a degree of creativity which enables us to shift our perspectives
and we can see I see what I'm looking at now. And all of these are better done by the right hemisphere. So the left hemisphere is less imaginative, less intuitive, less insightful and less intelligent.
So the trouble is that by doing this we're rendering ourselves less intelligent, less imaginative, less creative. And I think the evidence is around us that we are certainly not getting more intelligent, more insightful, certainly not more wise, and not more creative.
I couldn't agree more about the importance of the humanities and deep study.
As necessary background knowledge to dealing with the world, including, I would even add to dealing with practical problems in the world because the humanities help us understand context better.
Understanding context can never hurt in dealing with even the most practical of problems, including epidemics, including wars, etc.
Context is everything.
Exactly.
It changes fundamentally the nature of what things are when you see them in their context.
Well, you have this wonderful description in, I think the master and his emissary of a mountain and you say well what is the mountain. Is it the geology of the mountain is it the perception I have of it is it in the mountain of the painting is it how it's used.
It all depends on the context.
It's an attention the kind of attention that you pay to it. If you pay attention to it as a resource you see one thing. If you pay attention to it as a landmark you see another thing and so on.
It all depends on the on the attention you pay and it changes the world which is why I say attention is a moral act it brings the world into being and therefore has effects on the world and on us.
And there's just a few more ideas I've looked more with you before we end, but they're important. These ideas, which I think in the end are ways out and when I say ways out I don't mean that tomorrow we can exit the world that we've created at all.
But I think we can expand the number of people who think in new ways and hope for the best in that sense.
Absolutely.
Two, two ideas that that you present in your books that I think are important is one is this an idea of circularity.
The idea that that that the world is not is not linear.
And it's partly linear I should say it's not not linear it's only partly linear.
And it has a particular or even possibly a spiral dimension to it where things return and they evolve in a fashion that's much more circular than than a simple simple sequential line.
And that applies to the rise and fall of civilizations and of societies and it's something that you can mine that's one notion.
The second is one that is intrigued me since I was a youth but you have a whole chapter in it and no matter with things. And that is the coincidence of opposites.
Oh yes.
And the reason I'm raising this is because I think you say that opposites with the world is full of opposites is not almost nothing but opposites.
They define each other.
They need other to come about.
They exist without each other. And yet, as we when we're discussing polarization.
We're living in a world where increasingly one side wants to annihilate the opposite.
Which is, in some ways, if one buys into what you're saying one of the most destructive acts possible because you're destroying yourself in the process.
Yes.
Yes. How important are those notions as way.
These are difficult notions to just, you know, one really needs to read your books frankly to understand them well but what are how important are they in your view in moving.
I think they're very very important ideas.
I'll say a little about them.
I think it was Alan Watts said that trying to have a thing without its opposites is like saying I only want mountains but no valleys.
If you think about that you end up with a very dull flat world.
You need these both they define one another and they, they also interestingly, if you're not aware of the fact that they, they share far more than we imagine.
We're not aware of the dark side of the things that we pursue that we think are good.
It's not positive because we've decontextualized it and we've done it for a while and it seemed good, but we therefore make two completely irrational conclusions one is that more will be better which is not necessarily the case and in fact because
of the way in which things circle doing more may indeed cause collapse indeed that is awful so serious about civilizations so there we are.
But also, we may not see necessarily the good things that we are demonizing that these are things that we demonize may have an element of something rather important in them.
And so it's very important to see more than one side of a question.
In fact, that is to my mind what objectivity is objectivity isn't seeing things in an unreally detached mechanistic sort of way with all that's human about them.
Shaved off that's just a very distorted and very narrow way of looking at the world that won't lead you closer to truth. But what will lead you closer to truth is seeing as many possible aspects of what one's looking at it as possible.
In that sense, I think, and I think that, you know, the coincidence of opposites is a profoundly important principle which has been present in in Eastern philosophy and is present in many other philosophies around the world and was present in early Greek philosophy,
but was unfortunately ruled out of philosophy until the mid 19th century for about 2000 years following Aristotle so there we are.
But the other question the spiral motion and I'm glad you pointed out that it's not just circular, because it's an interesting point here if you look down the shaft of a spiral you see a circle, which seems enclosed and repetitive.
If you look along the line of a spiral you see something like a waveform that is moving in a certain direction. And when you put them together you have the spiral which is both moving around and moving onwards.
It's interesting if you image them physically, they do look like the waveform and the particle and the particle is what you see when you just looked like that the waveform is what you see when you see the bigger picture.
So, and what that means is that things do not tend to work in straight lines I say that not only is space known to be curved but mental space is curved.
And the difficulty is that seeing this requires already taking a bigger picture because when you're stuck wherever you are it only seems that you move onwards in line.
I mean a good image is that if I look outside the window here, the world seems to me to be flat I happen to know it's not.
And if I followed it far enough I come around the other side of the world and eventually come back to where I am. But for local purposes, it just seems to be a straight line leading on and on to America.
And so that's that's the difficulty is that people conceive of it as like this because where they are locally it has this look.
And that is important because we don't understand that almost everything well I would say everything that exists.
And certainly living organisms are massively complex examples of this that what exists is not complication but complexity and the difference is that complication is where you add modules to modules.
There's an increasingly linear hierarchy where there's still a logical linear structure and a jet engine is a complicated system, but a complex system is something like a single cell, which has thousands of things going on which we can't even map every second.
There are changes, processes that all interlink with one another feed back into one another so it has recursive loops and is intrinsically unpredictable. That is the important point.
So a complicated system could be in an ideal world predictable, but complex systems, which is what we're dealing with in this world are not in that sense predictable, which doesn't mean to say they're random.
There are very good ideas about where they're likely to go, but that's not the same as being able to predict them. So I think those points are probably worth making about those those shapes.
If you don't mind me asking about this. The other element about the civilizations that I did want to explore with you but I thought we didn't have time is, you know, it was fascinating what you said about how the reformation and the enlightenment.
There are fairly left hemisphere driven.
And I was happy to hear that by the way because even in my youth, even though the term enlightenment is so wonderful.
I always found that era a bit sterile, if I can put that term.
And then, of course, after we have the industrial revolution in the mid to late 19th century etc.
But there's a kind of let me call it a blip in between which I'd like to explore with you which is the romantics.
Which was not a long period, but a very, very productive period in terms of.
Indeed, indeed.
And philosophy both actually both.
Oh, very much so. Yes.
In Germany in England, etc.
Exactly.
What is it about that romantic period that struck you as something so interesting and so and that seemed more like a balanced master and his ms like scenario about the romantic period I'm curious because and maybe we
enlightenment as well as to why it is unlike its name in a way, rather left.
Well, the physicist David Bohm called it the endowment, which is rather nice.
I mean, I, I certainly don't wish to appear to be an enemy of the enlightenment.
I think if I've been alive at the time might have been a great exponent of its its values.
But of course, given time and a greater and broader perspective, we can see more than you could have done living then.
And what unfortunately has happened is that something started as being how often do I have to say this started out as being a very useful corrective ended up being taken to hubristic lengths overreaching itself.
I think it has been an agent for our destruction and I think the romantics were people who saw where this was going, and they were still able to access ways of seeing the world.
And it became more and more detached explicit rationalistic disembedded from our history from our culture. As that process was beginning there was still enough in contact with it and in contact with the natural world to see that here there was something that spoke of something far deeper and more complex
than anything that could be rationalized as the right and the good and so on.
So I see them as people who tapped into a great source of energy, which led to a real flowering of the best of what the right hemisphere can offer in conjunction with the left hemisphere.
So of course one of the many myths one has to dispel is the idea that the right hemisphere is kind of a bit sort of let it all hang out.
And it isn't it's far more aware actually of the need for counterbalance for for being to seeing harmonies between things than the left hemisphere is just one good and followed it.
And so what they produced there was, I think some of the most highly sophisticated philosophy that the West has ever seen, in particular figures like Shelling and parts of Hegel and parts of Slyamacher and some of the slagal brothers, and so forth.
So I think it was a very, very rich point and in England, very importantly both Wordsworth and particularly Coleridge wrote really enormously importantly about these these topics.
I think Coleridge's notebooks and his biography a little area are more important than his poems.
Probably it was a joint effort but the the preface to the lyrical ballad is another, you know, absolutely seminal work on the nature of imagination and its difference from a sort of loose fantasy that takes you away from reality but in fact only chance of getting into reality and understanding it for the first time.
So this was a very, very rich period and it did also produce a great poetry it's interesting that poetry and philosophy went hand in hand they did with Goethe you see.
He was both a great philosopher and a scientist and a poet and playwright, and then people like Coleridge who was a poet and a philosopher.
He was like Sam Johnson who is an interesting and complicated and almost self contradictory but for that reason really really interesting figure who was a philosopher of a kind who was a poet who was a playwright.
So at this period there was this coming together of the arts and philosophy in a way that I think was very rich and fruitful, but then by the middle of the 19th century things started to become more divided, again, and you know there was a division
of the direction philosophy was going in, at least in some parts of it, and the arts, but there were still, and who carried on and become the seeds really of the best part of 20th century philosophy the phenomenological philosophers.
So people like Nietzsche was mad as a hatter but at times a genius his insight was incredible.
And people like pass and CS pass and William James and so forth, running through to Heidegger Merleau-Ponteschela and the rest in Hussle and so forth in the 20th century.
So there is a tradition there that is there for the tapping, but we need to rejig the way in which these things are thought of.
There is a kind of chauvinism of the left hemisphere as I say in the book, which means that really people only take seriously the less intelligent and less insightful and certainly less wise productions of the left hemisphere.
What also I think is really important is that the left hemisphere with its narrow focus naturally tends to bore deeper and deeper into where it is.
There are two things about that. One is that it reminds me of the story of the man who'd lost his keys and was looking under the spotlight and somebody asked him where had he lost the keys.
He said over there, why are you not looking over there because the light is over here. I think that is an image of how things work in science and philosophy a lot of the time now.
And I think the other thing is that we really only can understand highly specialized work, which is important and honorable and good and necessary.
If we are also able to see a broad picture. And for some reason, people who are and they're rare able to draw together the strands of these these things are somehow at a disadvantage compared with people who've narrowly researched one very small area,
because they can say I'm the world expert on whatever it is. Whereas the price of seeing things broadly is that you can never be the person who has spent his whole life studying one particular thing.
So we need to get back to a world that honors what you mentioned is the Renaissance man, you know, this is a very important idea.
Well, and and this linkage to ever larger context is ultimately even takes us to the sacred.
In fact, one could make the case that the sacred is almost nothing but an ever expanding engagement with an ever expanding context.
And if an item, maybe there's no end to it, yes, and I think I've also heard you say correct me if I'm wrong that in fact, we almost absolutely need to return to the sacred as an essential shift in rebalancing ourselves.
We are in fact doing the opposite we are seeking material answers to spiritual problems.
Is that is that about right is that is that the way you see it and on the sacred and a fabulous last few chapters by the way on on the sacred and
yes, so thank you.
The chapter on the sacred, which for those who haven't read it I should warn them is a short book in itself, it saves you 100 pages.
But writing it costs me more than anything else I've ever written because it's a very difficult subject to talk about it's almost archetypally the thing you cannot directly speak about because language immediately collapses into something else and something familiar which you're trying to get beyond and
away from.
So, but I do think it's absolutely central.
And you know, when you started saying that about how in a way the sacred is where expanding context lead, I was, I was thinking very much of a brilliant passage in Shelling, which I do quote, probably in the epilogue.
I can't remember now to the matter of things.
But in it he says that when, when people have seen whatever it is they see in the light of the all, and he capitalizes the, what it in the English translation it has been capitalized as the all in order to get, get through to see that it is a deep
concept.
And that all is something which he sees as the sacred whole that when people have seen that, then they have had real insights into the nature of being and I think this would be true of this is something courage talks about that at times he can only see
in fragments, but at other times he can see the all and when he can, he has insights that are otherwise denied him, Wordsworth said the same, all these thinkers thought the same.
And Shelling has this image that when we lose the all, we are like people who are treading through a waste of sand, and we're trying to build life by putting together painstakingly grain of sand by grain of sand, but we will never achieve the all this way.
I just thought I'd put that in, but I do think that what is missing is the context of something that tells us a few things that we're missing.
One is that there is something bigger than us.
There is something wiser than us.
There is something that knows more than we do.
Why should we imagine that with our limited brains, we have reached the summit of understanding.
We're evolutionary creatures and those that came before us might have said they had an understanding of everything a mouse might say that if it could speak, but why should we at this stage have that understanding.
There may be much more in this imaginative creative world than we are privy to.
One thing is that we would regain wonder, and I don't think this is a small thing. I think that the loss of wonder goes with hubris goes with arrogance, and goes with the diminishment of our sense of the human sense of the world.
I don't think that all means that you are small in relation to some tyrannical being, but of course it doesn't always the sense of actually being part of something that is much greater than what it is one knows.
The third thing is that it would bring us to an understanding that we are all, as it were, only partial beings, only limited beings, and that we are part of one another and that we owe a degree of compassion to one another.
And one could say that what is missing from our world is the sense of something that is greater than ourselves, something that is awe-inspiring, and something that is based in love.
So I think we won't recover unless we're able to adapt ourselves to that. I was reminded by the fact that Dan Dennett died a week or so ago, and one shouldn't speak ill of the dead, so I won't.
But amongst his under follies he wrote a book called Breaking the Spell, by which he meant of course breaking the sense of the being a wonderful and sacred cosmos, and I can hardly think of a more profound missing of the right target.
The spell that is being cast over us every minute of our lives is the spell of the machine, and it's that that we need to break.
The spell of the machine, interesting. Yes, it could well be.
The machine is simply a physical expression of the left hemisphere's will for power, and AI is a very much more advanced expression of the same thing. It's a mechanical expression of the same mentality.
You know what I wonder about that is why we are so irrevocably attracted to it. We almost, I mean, a simple question, why can't we get off that path? We are determined to commit a kind of suicide, actually.
Yes.
Not all of it. Yes, I mean, no, no, well, here I somewhat disagree from Mattias Desmetsch on something he said recently, which is that we seem to have a sort of suicide wish.
I'm not sure this is right. I think that, and I have said that we are committing suicide. We're committing intellectual moral and actual physical suicide, I think, as a species.
I think that it's a desire for death, because really, everyone is desperate to live longer to find ways of going into ever greater age and perhaps freezing their body and, you know, there's a denial of death, which is I think a very unhealthy thing.
And not the opposite of life death is the, is part of the cycle as you were saying of the cycle that is the nature of things, and the opposite of life is not death but mechanicity.
And that is what is the danger that life will be eaten up by mechanical thinking.
So, where he says that I think what's happening is that we are in love with power and we don't notice, because we're so seduced by it that where it is leading.
There are many myths in the history of the East and West, in which people are deceived by an alluring idea. They were seduced by Cersei, they were seduced by the sirens, they were seduced by the Pied Piper.
You know, there was something that led them and they didn't like a flock of gathering swine or like a cloud of insects, they were drawn towards something that they couldn't see what it was, and it was their destruction.
So, I've recently been thinking and I can't help thinking like this of the phenomenon the really extraordinary phenomenon of sophisticated parasites, the parasites themselves are not actually for sophisticated at all they're usually very simple things, or at least apparently
but they have the power to take over and commandeer the nervous system of a higher animal. And so there are these ones that will infect insects to make them behave in ways that are useful for the life cycle of the parasite but completely not in the interest of the host.
And the most extraordinary one is toxoplasma which to complete its life cycle, it must get from a rat into a cat. And when a rat is infected with toxoplasma, it changes its behavior completely so it's no longer afraid of rats, it approaches cats, it approaches cats, and therefore aids the work of the parasite.
Now this is extraordinary and I don't know quite what to make of it. And I'm not suggesting that physically we have a parasite but there may be a kind of mental parasite, a force, a drive, I don't know what, which is taking us over and governing us.
You know, Freud thought that we had drives, Jung thought we had drives, Milton thought that we had drives, in Christianity in general people have thought there were drives that led us to certain places and some we should follow, some we should be wary of and resist.
And I think that is a kind of ancient wisdom that we've forgotten.
We have and I would even, I would add to it interesting, the terminology actually fits is that in an old Sufi lore, something called the commanding self, which is necessary for life because it is the life force, if you wish to some degree, and thus these drives that you're describing.
On the other hand, if it grows too large, it commands your whole life, and command I suppose is similar to the left hemisphere, it's command mode, and it does the following which is I think a wonderful expression.
The commanding self prevents you from doing what you want to do.
No prevents you from doing what you need to do and makes you do what you don't want to do. In other words, the slide tracks you off. Let's call it a healthier state of being.
So, and that's it's like an addiction.
Yes, and, and it is a bit like a parasite exactly as you say, except the parasite already in us. Yes.
Well, you know, I was staggered to find these, these myths from around the world that approximate to, well, a much more sophisticated versions of the idea of the master and his emissary.
You know, in the each thing.
There's this, you know, this image of the emperor, who is betrayed by a headstrong general who decides that he knows best. And in this sense, what should be done, and it would be good for all is sacrificed to the will of this headstrong general.
And the best of these, of course, is the, the myth with which I begin part three of the matter of things the Onondaga legend of the two brothers which is just the most amazingly accurate.
It just staggered me when I just thought these people have perfect insight into how the two hemispheres work together. Anyway,
thank you. We've covered a lot of ground. I think you've once again shed a lot of light on why we are where we are. And, and a deeper sense of our more comprehensive self and how we can go beyond where we are.
You know, I think at the end of the day, I think you've used these words at some point, what we really need is a kind of the bottom line is a change of heart and a change of mind, not just the change of system.
Right. I'm fully on board with that as I know many, many other people are, or we can get your ideas among many others out about these kinds of sensible and necessary changes of mind and heart.
Hopefully, we may be able to, in centuries to come, rekindle our better side so thank you for this wonderful.
Thank you very much. I hope so. Thank you for emphasizing that. I think it's very important. Yes.
There we go. I mean, people want me to give answers, but the answers preclude the thing that the first thing is to change what goes on in here. Otherwise, all the rest of it will be just amount to nothing.
And I think your paradigm helps us in that direction.
Good. Good. Thank you very much.